A friend is someone that you can really trust, you can trust that they won't hurt you
and also that they'll help you out if they can.
We get together and we'll say things at exactly the same time and exactly the same tone
of voice.
It's kind of scary sometimes.
A friend to me is someone who knows you inside and out.
The advantage of having good friends with spiritual mind is you both are working towards
the same purpose.
Coming up on young people ask, roadblocks to friendship.
They have their own little groups and if you're not in that group, then you're not invited
either.
Young people talk about friendship with God.
I definitely think that having a friendship with God is a hard concept to understand.
The dangers of making the wrong kind of friends.
I got involved in that association basically at school and then a modern day trauma.
How are your parents telling me I had a flat tire or something?
Oh yeah.
You know, you're different from the other girls, aren't you?
All this coming up on young people ask, how can I make real friends?
There exists a friend sticking closer than a brother.
The Bible said that almost 3,000 years ago and it's still true today.
Everybody needs friends.
The problem is making friends is not always easy.
Sometimes young people feel that they just don't fit in, even with their Christian brothers.
They feel like they're always on the outside looking in.
The road to friendship is not always an easy ride.
Young people in four different countries told us to some of the roadblocks they've encountered.
The first roadblock feeling left out.
They have their own little proofs and if you're not in that group, then you're not invited either.
If you're not a certain age, you don't belong.
It's like an amusement park.
If you're not a certain height, you can't get on the ride.
That's what a lot of young people do to you.
Being ignored can affect us a lot.
You can get so sad that you just don't want to open up to anyone.
For me, when I came from Bolivia, I got here and I had no friends.
I felt so strange.
Everybody's speaking a different language.
Everybody looked different than me.
Being shy at times, it could seem lonely because they're either too scared or too shy to
associate with them so you'd rather stay home and just do your own thing.
Whether you're young, new in town or just shy, it hurts to feel left out.
There is a solution to these problems.
Following the advice of God's word, the Bible.
It has the best advice on friendship ever written.
For example, Philippians 2.4 gives us one of the keys to making friends,
taking a personal interest to others.
If you show interest to other people, they will do the same for you.
If we want to have friends, we first have to be friends ourselves.
You have to take the initiative.
My mom's always pushing me.
Okay.
I want you to talk to a certain number of people at this meeting.
I'm trying to widen out.
A good place to widen out is at the Kingdom Hall.
Why not take the initiative and try to meet people?
Hey, how you doing?
Well, it's good to see you.
How's it going?
Good to see you again.
Hey, it's a lot of tools you lack here.
I like to arrive at meetings 20 minutes before they begin.
In that way, I have the opportunity to speak with more people.
Probably the best way to meet people would be by going out into service.
They put you with a person that you might not actually talk to, usually in the Kingdom Hall.
And then you're like, oh man, who would this person?
And I wanted to go with this sister or something like that.
Eventually, you start talking, and that's how you meet the person.
You get to another better.
Feeling left out is just one roadblock to friendship.
For some young people, another roadblock may be personality.
I think somebody who really is out to impress everybody really turns people off
because they constantly talk about themselves and don't really listen to what everybody else
has to say.
The whole conversation is on that person.
You don't like to be what a person has to consider it because all the time you're just
talking about themselves.
I get the impression that once people
get to know me, they no longer want to be my friends.
Because I'm very impulsive.
Well, I yell a lot.
Sometimes we need to make changes in our personality.
As the Bible says, we must continue to be readjusted.
God can help us to make these changes.
I pray to Jehovah for self-control, and that I become less impulsive.
Each time I pray to Jehovah, I ask him to help me, and I feel things are getting better.
If you feel insecure and you want people to like you, one thing to be careful of is not
to become too overbearing or neurotic or nervous and try to really force it.
The best way to make yourself like a ball is to be yourself.
Don't try to be someone that you're not because if you try to put on this front or
a different person, people are going to see through that.
Another way to improve our personality is to learn to communicate.
Ecclesiastes37 says, there's a time to keep quiet, and a time to speak.
I've been told I talk a lot, but now I'm going to be quiet for the rest of the day.
There's a time for everything.
That's something I had to learn.
I think knowing how to listen is one of the most important things, right?
Because in a friendship, there's communication and there's dialogue.
It shows your interest that in others, when you don't interrupt a person's talk.
A true friend knows how to listen to other people's problems.
When your friend starts telling you his feelings,
but you ignore him and go on to something else that you want to talk about,
well, that wouldn't be very nice.
And he's going to say, what kind of friend is that?
Working on our personality can help us to win friends.
Even so, we can hit another roadblock when friendships seem to become too close.
To have a friend that I also like to have my space,
because I've had that experience when they get so close to you that they just don't want to let go.
At 2nd Corinthians 613, the Bible tells us to widen out.
Don't let your one friend be your answer to happiness.
If they're just relying on you, then they have the problem of not widening out,
and they're missing out on so much more of what's in the congregation than just you.
Why didn't he now open up opportunities for friendship that you may have overlooked?
A bunch of the guys will always be together.
And then we noticed this other guy always been alone.
At the beginning, we used to think he was like, ah, this guy's not worth it, he's not good.
For our surprise, the guy was really nice. He was really, really, really funny.
There's never been a lot of young people in our congregation,
but we looked around to see who we could get along with, even if we weren't the same age.
We also looked in other congregations, and now we have a nice group.
Yes, widen out.
Get to know the brothers and sisters in your congregation.
Learn to enjoy variety of people, people of different ages and backgrounds.
So take an interest in others.
Work on personality flaws, widen out.
When you follow vital principles, you'll find that others enjoy being around you,
and making friends becomes easier.
There is one friendship, however, that is more important than any other.
But when I was younger, I didn't really think of Jehovah that much as a person.
Well, I definitely think that having a friendship with God is a hard concept to understand.
I like the scripture that says, taste and see that Jehovah is good,
because if you want to get to know Jehovah as a friend and develop a relationship with him,
you do have to put forth effort, and you have to take the first step you could say.
You have to see Jehovah as a person, and that he's real.
And that when you pray, you know he's hearing you.
When I'm all alone, I take advantage of the opportunity to talk to him.
I talk to him all the time.
There is no greater feeling than having Jehovah as your friend, and it's worth the effort.
Friends in your life come and go, but the only person who will never truly leave you is Jehovah.
He can be your friend forever if you want him to be.
Our family went through some hard times, having a single mom.
We didn't know our next meal was coming from, we would be able to pay the rent,
and I think the biggest thing I learned in my life is to throw that anxiety upon Jehovah,
and he'll take care of you in every single time without fail, and he's come through for us.
My parents weren't in the truth.
The only thing I had was Jehovah.
So I had developed a real relationship with him.
When I think of a friend, I think of somebody you desire to tell your feelings to,
where you can always tell Jehovah anything.
Through the good times and the bad, one way or another, I've seen that he's always helped me to continue.
Whenever I have a problem, whenever I'm down, I always know that I can go to him
anytime that I want to for anything.
I think you kind of go from where it's just saying his name to the microphone.
That's a wonderful answer to a point where he's real to you, and he's there,
and he's in your everyday life, and you want him there more than anything,
because he's your friend, and you know that he's the best friend that you could ever have.
When you make Jehovah your best friend, you'll be drawn to others who do likewise.
In the Christian congregation, you can enjoy friendships with people of different ages and backgrounds,
friendships that can influence you in a positive way.
What helped me more than anything else was the help from the other young people in the congregation.
They always tried to include me, not only in recreation, but also in spiritual activities.
I think that having friends that are older than ourselves is a good thing,
because we can talk to them about our problems, then as friends, they'll help us.
I like to play ball.
At first, I didn't want to hang out with them because I had a little bit of nail, quiet, or they, you know,
they're too old. They can't play.
So, when they were like, I had to go after them eating and play basketball.
I suppose I just got to play.
We beat you.
My main adult friends are my parents.
I think they're the ones who can give you the best advice.
Since they love you more than anyone else.
Well, I talk to my mom and dad, and they'd listen.
And I know that sounds very story bookish, like it's out of some story fairy tale,
but it's what happened to me.
Whether they're young or old, the best kind of friends are people who are friends of God.
Among true Christians, you can find friends who will not hurt you,
but who will help you.
You can have friends who won't tear you down, but who will build you up.
You can have friends you can trust, who are loyal.
If you are a friend of God, you will never be without real friends.
Not everyone is satisfied with who's some Christian association.
Some are envious of young people who seem to be more exciting,
who seem to be having a good time.
When you're young, you need to feel accepted and to belong to a group.
You jump through all kinds of hoops, you do all of these kind of things with your attire,
with the way you wear your hair, with the way you talk, with the way you stand, to try to fit in.
Everybody bought the same pair of sneakers, and it was like,
if you didn't have these sneakers, it's like you weren't cool.
That desire to fit in can be harmful if it draws you to the wrong crown.
The Bible warns bad association spoil useful habits.
It's the person who shows by his attitude and his way of doing things
that he doesn't follow Jehovah's principles.
The Bible's warning against bad association can even apply within the congregation.
Because like some young people in the congregation,
like the act one way in the meetings,
but as soon as they go out, you know, they start acting with different ways.
Like, who is this? This is the same person that I was in the meeting yesterday.
Because you can see that there are many young people that are like really rebellious,
and you can see right away that they're not good associations.
I think you can tell a lot about a person by what he talks about.
Does he just talk about having fun?
Or does he talk about spiritual things?
You may recognize that certain youths are bad association.
Still, it may be hard not to envy them.
When you're around these world of kids and they're all dating and doing the sports thing,
and you want to be in with what they're doing,
this times when you want to do stuff,
and then your parents are like,
well, they're not good associations stuff,
so you wonder, well, if I can hang out with them,
who am I going to hang out with?
Living by godly standards will limit your choice of friends.
It will also make you stand out as different.
There's a lot of pressure on you as a witness.
They think you're weird that you belong to a sect or something strange.
The kids hate me. They would spit on me.
They hit me on the back in class so I couldn't listen.
Every time I went to school, my heart would be pounding.
Faced with such pressures, it may be tempting to hide your Christian beliefs.
When I ran into classmates while out in service,
they would see that I was dressed up,
and they'd ask me what I was doing,
but I was afraid to tell them that I was preaching.
The desire to be liked, to fit in,
to be like everybody else is powerful,
so powerful that some even secretly crave association with the wrong crowd.
Two young Christians recall how bad associations nearly led to their spiritual ruin.
I got involved in bad association, basically, at school.
I sought out people who were those things like exciting and cool and fun
and witnesses that were leading double eyes.
Some of them sold drugs, anything from marijuana to crack cocaine.
It pretty much started off with drinking.
Selling drugs was the end thing to do.
The guys were going around with beepers.
They had money.
For some reason, I felt that I could sell but not use.
We'd go to some parking lot somewhere and pull out the booze.
Basically, it was all done at school.
My mother was out service.
My dad was working, so they didn't know what I was doing.
Oh, definitely. It affects you spiritually.
You constantly are feeling guilty, of course.
I really didn't have any love for Jehovah in my heart.
If there was there, I couldn't feel it.
I knew what the Bible said.
As far as the other children in the congregation,
I could give you the same answers they did.
So it wasn't the head knowledge that, but it just wasn't in my heart.
There's only so much you can do for so long and you're eventually going to get caught.
To my mom, she pleaded with me basically to give Jehovah one more chance.
It all came out, so we had lots of elders meetings.
So I really made an effort to try to have a relationship myself with Jehovah.
Oh, telling my parents was harder than anything.
Because when you're involved in wrongdoing,
you think, this is me I'm hurting.
I know I'm hurting myself, but I decide to hurt myself.
And it doesn't affect anybody else.
And then to speak to them and let them know how you've let them down.
I've never seen them be so wounded.
I changed my association.
I started hanging around with some of the witness kids in the area.
And they helped me out a lot.
My relatives and my friends and the good examples in the congregation,
they helped me to see that you absolutely have to change your association
if you want to do good.
What I regret most is that I wasted all these years
being selfish when I could have been serving Jehovah.
My parents, they really had a lot of love for me,
but I don't know.
In return, I just gave them basically nothing but heartache.
And I thought I knew what I could handle and what I couldn't.
But Jehovah knows what's going to hurt you and what's not.
And so if you just trust in that,
you'll have a successful youth without all that pain.
Life is just so much better for me.
The blessings that you get Jehovah gives you
by just serving him is incomparable to what the world has to offer.